During bacterial evolution, the ability of bacteria to adapt to new environments has been favored by the acquisition of genes through horizontal gene transfer (HGT) [1]. Despite this apparent advantage, each organism must balance the need to acquire beneficial characteristics through HGT with the need to prevent the entry of genetic elements that impose additional energy costs. A system that allows bacteria to limit the entry of genetic elements is the adaptive immune system CRISPR/Cas (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats and their associated Cas proteins), which has been described in many Bacteria and Archaea. Extensive research has shown that when a microorganism contains the CRISPR/Cas system in its genome, it survives initial infection by phages or plasmids because it can acquire a short DNA fragment, and then start up its machinery to recognize and degrade them. When the incoming DNA is harmful to the cell, e.g. lytic phages, having an active CRISPR/Cas system offers a selective advantage. In contrast, when external DNA is required for survival, e.g. against antibiotic-selective conditions, this inhibition can be detrimental [2, 3]. This prokaryotic immune system is based on the use of small RNAs that limit phage infection and the entrance of plasmids [2, 3]. The CRISPR elements are composed of small direct repeat sequences (DR) between 21 and 48 base pairs (bp), separated by hypervariable sequences or spacers that range in size from 26 to 72 bp. Many of these sequences are derived from mobile genetic elements such as plasmids and phages [2, 4, 5]. An important step in understanding the role of CRISPR was the identification of genes located very close to them and their conservation in the different CRISPR systems. These genes were called cas because of their association with the CRISPR repeats [4, 6]. It was determined that the Cas proteins contain domains characteristic of nucleases, helicases, polymerases and various RNA-binding proteins [7]. The number of cas genes may vary from 4 to over 20 and the product of these genes, the Cas proteins, provide the enzymatic machinery required for the acquisition of spacers as well as for invader element marking. The central Cas proteins are characterized by their proximity to the CRISPR loci and are widely distributed among bacterial and archaeal species. Experiments in multiple bacteria have shown that these systems play an important role in the exchange of genetic material and they may affect its evolution rate [8]. Additionally, the CRISPR/Cas expression is tightly regulated but the information is limited to some genera [3, 5, 8–13].

Furthermore, an additional function has recently been attributed to this system: That is regulation of gene expression related to virulence. This function has been observed in several pathogenic bacteria [8, 14, 15]. Some studies highlight the potential of the CRISPR/Cas system to modulate bacterial physiology and the unexpected forms that could mitigate or increase its virulence [14]. In this regard, in Pseudomonas aeruginosa this system is capable of modulating biofilm production, an important virulence factor for this and various other pathogenic microorganisms [15]; in Streptococcus pyogenes the presence of the CRISPR/Cas system modulates prophage contents and hence its virulence; in Enterococcus faecalis and E. faecium a correlation between the absence of CRISPR/Cas and the presence of antimicrobial resistance genes has been determined [14–16]. Lastly, in Francisella, RNA-RNA interactions (mediated by the Cas9 protein), result in a reduction of essential lipoprotein transcripts for the pro-inflammatory response of the host, consequently these bacteria persist and cause infection in animal models [14, 15]. For these reasons, the role of this system in modulating virulence and antibiotic resistance in different bacterial pathogens represents an excellent opportunity as a research area.

Klebsiella pneumoniae is among the bacteria that have emerged as important opportunistic pathogens in hospital environments due to their high rate of antibiotic resistance and high degree of dispersion [17, 18]. The multidrug resistance of this bacterium has been associated with the presence of high molecular weight plasmids [17, 19]. Despite the increasing information on the presence of CRISPR/Cas in several pathogens, information about these systems in K. pneumoniae is scarce. Therefore, the main goal of this study was to determine, by means of bioinformatics tools and manual curation, the presence or absence of the CRISPR/Cas system in available K. pneumoniae genomes. Our results show that the CRISPR/Cas system is not homogeneously distributed in these bacteria and in those where it is present it is inserted at the same genome site. Additionally, most DR sequences in the CRISPR elements are specific for K. pneumoniae, as no homologues were found.
